docs: add a guide for adding internal users to rocks (#653)
canonical/rockcraft: docs/how-to/rocks/add-internal-user-in-rocks.rst

Reviewer: it would also be nice to show set a rock's pebble service to run as this user

Author: That will be tricky, since run-user doesn't support manually-added internal users, and su/sudo don't have available slice definitions yet.

Author: added a service that uses the field `user`.

.. _add_internal_user_in_rocks:

How to add an internal user to a rock
*************************************

> Rockcraft allows you to use ``run-user`` to specify the user you want to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Rockcraft allows you to use ``run-user`` to specify the user you want to run the
```

rock's service(s) with. Without using that field in your rockcraft.yaml, the
service(s) will be run by the root user. The downside, however, of using

> ``run-user`` is that only supports one user called ``_daemon_`` with a UID/GID

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``run-user`` is that it only supports one user called ``_daemon_`` with a UID/GID
```

> of 84792. For some daemon services that will be enough, but some other services

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of 84792. For most daemon services that's sufficient, but some services
```

require that the running user should have a specific username and/or UID.

In order to add new internal user or group to a rock, three packages (or their
respective slices) are needed:

> - ``base-files``: to create the base directories such as ``/etc`` and ``/bin``

Reviewer 2: Why do these need to be staged? Is it insufficient to simply use `useradd` and `groupadd` to modify the relevant `/etc` files in the overlay?

Author: see comment below.

- ``base-passwd``: to produce basic ``/etc/passwd`` and ``/etc/group`` files,

> - ``passwd``: to provide ``useradd`` and ``groupadd`` commands.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand why this needs to be staged at all. The `useradd` and `groupadd` commands being used in `override-build` come from the build system, don't they?

Author: this is needed for /root and /home directories. Without /root, the default root user (that has /root as its home) won't be able to run any commands (an error will show because /root does not exist). Similarly, /home is needed to become the base dir of the home dir of the created user(s).

Reviewer 3: right but I think @lengau is asking specifically about `passwd` - the build system already has `useradd` and `groupadd`

Author: removed passwd_bins slice.

Invoking ``useradd`` and ``groupadd`` command can take place in the
:ref:`build <lifecycle>` step, by appending the commands to the build flow.

> However, the changes made by those commands should apply to the base system and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, the changes made by those commands normally apply to the base system,
```

not the build system. Hence, ``$CRAFT_PART_INSTALL`` should be passed as the

> root system to those two commands.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
root directory to those two commands.
```

the rock's service(s) with. Without using that field in your rockcraft.yaml,
the service(s) will be run by the root user. The downside, however, of using
``run-user`` is that it only supports one user called ``_daemon_`` with a
UID/GID of 84792. For most daemon services that's sufficient, but other
services require that the running user should have a specific username and/or
UID.

In order to add new internal user or group to a rock, three packages (or their
respective slices) are needed:
- ``base-files``: to create the base directories such as ``/etc`` and ``/bin``
- ``base-passwd``: to produce basic ``/etc/passwd`` and ``/etc/group`` files,
- ``passwd``: to provide ``useradd`` and ``groupadd`` commands.

Invoking ``useradd`` and ``groupadd`` command can take place in the
:ref:`build <lifecycle>` step, by appending the commands to the build flow.
However, the changes made by those commands normally apply to the base system,
not the build system. Hence, ``$CRAFT_PART_INSTALL`` should be passed as the
root directory to those two commands.

The following *rockcraft.yaml* illustrates how to use ``useradd`` command in
``override-build`` field.

> .. literalinclude:: ../code/internal-user/rockcraft.yaml

Author: done

.. _add_internal_user_in_rocks:

How to add an internal user to a rock
*************************************

Rockcraft allows you to use ``run-user`` to specify the user you want to run
the rock's service(s) with. Without using that field in your rockcraft.yaml,
the service(s) will be run by the root user. The downside, however, of using
``run-user`` is that it only supports one user called ``_daemon_`` with a
UID/GID of 84792. For most daemon services that's sufficient, but other
services require that the running user should have a specific username and/or
UID.

In order to add a new internal user or group to a rock, two packages (or their
respective slices) are needed:

> - ``base-files``: to create the base dirs such as ``/root`` and ``/home``,

Reviewer: missing a newline (see the rendered docs)

- ``base-passwd``: to produce basic ``/etc/passwd`` and ``/etc/group`` files.

Invoking the ``useradd`` and ``groupadd`` commands can take place in the

> :ref:`build <lifecycle>` step, by appending the commands to the build flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`build <lifecycle>` step.
```

> However, the changes made by those commands normally apply to the base system,

Reviewer: This is not clear. The way I read it is:
"if i use `adduser` in the build step, they will affect my base system"

1- that's not the case
2- what's the "base system"?

Author: Reworded.

not the build system. Hence, ``$CRAFT_PART_INSTALL`` should be passed as the
root directory to those two commands.

> The following *rockcraft.yaml* illustrates how to use ``useradd`` command in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following ``rockcraft.yaml`` illustrates how to use ``useradd`` command in
```

> ``override-build`` field inside a part.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the ``override-build`` field inside a part.
```

.. literalinclude:: ../code/internal-user/rockcraft.yaml
    :language: yaml
    :start-after: [docs:rock-parts]
    :end-before: [docs:rock-parts-end]

> Furthermore, let's add a service that tests the running user by executing

Reviewer: This is a very fast context switch.
Also, it's doing more than that. It's **running a service as that user**

Author: What do you mean? the context here is about adding a user, then testing that it exists. If we keep it simple, there shouldn't be a step in between.

The service runs whoami to prove that pebble services can be run with the created user as well. There are other form of tests can be done, but this one was like hitting two birds with one stone (or rock) imo.

Reviewer: I mean that the text jumps from the actual "adding a new user" to "running a Pebble service that user", without much context. There's no bridge between the two sections, so it's a very abrupt context switch.

> The service runs whoami to prove that pebble services can be run with the created user as well. There are other form of tests can be done, but this one was like hitting two birds with one stone (or rock) IMO.

Yes, but again, it's lacking the details of what's happening. The important bit is not the `whoami` but the fact that you can enforce the execution of a service to be owned by your user, **regardless of the OCI user**

Author: I changed both the flow and the contents of that part. Furthermore, the service was changed to a python http service.

.. _add_internal_user_in_rocks:

How to add an internal user to a rock
*************************************

Rockcraft allows you to use :ref:`run-user <rockcraft_yaml_run_user>` to
specify the user you want to run the rock's service(s) with. Without using that
field in the ``rockcraft.yaml`` file, the service(s) will be run by the root

> user. However, ``run-user`` only accepts a limited amount of well-known users,

Author: The supported users are listed in the `run-user` section which was referenced in the first line of this paragraph.

> user. However, ``run-user`` only accepts a limited amount of well-known users,

Reviewer 4: Missed that, my bad. Since `_daemon_` is a [Canonical convention](https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/unifying-user-identity-across-snaps-and-rocks/36469#naming-convention), let's remove "well-known".

> which could become a constraint for certain container applications.

Author: Hi Michael and thank you for chipping in.
I'll be incorporating your changes and responding to some of your comments and suggestions shortly.

> which could become a constraint for certain container applications.

Author: "Key" is more suitable to a dictionary or a map object IMHO. "Field" on the other hand a document attributes, like in the case of the rockcraft.yaml file. Furthermore, "field" was the one used throughout the rest of the doc pages, and changing it here would require changing it everywhere else.

> which could become a constraint for certain container applications.

Reviewer 4: OK, let's leave it as "field", then.

In order to add a new internal user or group to a rock, two packages (or their
respective slices) are needed:

- ``base-files``: to create the base dirs such as ``/root`` and ``/home``,
- ``base-passwd``: to produce basic ``/etc/passwd`` and ``/etc/group`` files.

Invoking the ``useradd`` and ``groupadd`` commands can take place in the

> :ref:`build <lifecycle>` step. However, the changes made by those commands will

Author: As per the other doc pages, no. Check https://documentation.ubuntu.com/rockcraft/en/latest/explanation/parts/#build-artefacts for reference.

The following ``rockcraft.yaml`` illustrates how to use ``useradd`` command in
the ``override-build`` field inside a part.

.. literalinclude:: ../code/internal-user/rockcraft.yaml
    :language: yaml
    :start-after: [docs:rock-parts]
    :end-before: [docs:rock-parts-end]

Next, let's add a simple Python web service that runs a python script. The
python script will be executed to return an HTTP response containing the
username that is running the python web service. We will put this file in a
``cgi-bin`` folder, and give the file the executive permission with
``chmod +x cgi-bin/getuser.py``:

.. literalinclude:: ../code/internal-user/cgi-bin/getuser.py
    :language: python

Finally, we will add a service to our ``rockcraft.yaml`` that runs the python
web server with ``cgi`` capabilities:

.. literalinclude:: ../code/internal-user/rockcraft.yaml
    :language: yaml
    :start-after: [docs:rock-services]
    :end-before: [docs:rock-services-end]

Moving along, the rock can be built by running:

.. literalinclude:: ../code/internal-user/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:pack-rock]
    :end-before: [docs:pack-rock-end]
    :dedent: 2

> We can test the existence of the new user by running the image and accessing
> the url ``http://127.0.0.1/cgi-bin/getuser.py`` with curl. The returned
> response should contain our username:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can now check which internal user is running the part by running the image
and querying ``http://127.0.0.1/cgi-bin/getuser.py`` with curl:

.. literalinclude:: ../code/internal-user/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:check-user]
    :end-before: [docs:check-user-end]
    :dedent: 2

The response should contain the new user name:

// response here
```

.. literalinclude:: ../code/internal-user/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:check-user]
    :end-before: [docs:check-user-end]

>     :dedent: 2

Reviewer 4: Per the style guide, we should split inputs and outputs. Would it be possible for you to modify the script so we can read the output as a separate code block?

Author: the output can be added in task.yal, but I added it explicitly in the tutorial file.
